Secure Handling of Disclosure Information Policy

Strathaven Community Trust, SCIO:  [PERSON]

The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance and instruction on how to appropriately handle disclosures for those who will have access to them and to provide assurance to Volunteer Scotland Disclosure Services and our staff and volunteers that their disclosure information will be handled, used, stored and destroyed appropriately and in accordance with the Disclosure Scotland Code of Practice.

For the purpose of this policy, PVG Scheme Disclosures and Level 2 Disclosures issued from 1 April 2025 onwards and PVG Scheme Records and PVG Short Scheme Records, Standard disclosures and Enhanced disclosures issued prior to 1 April 2025 will be referred to as disclosures.

This policy is for organisations enrolled with Volunteer Scotland Disclosure Services to access disclosures for the purpose of assessing individual’s suitability for paid and/or voluntary work.

In accordance with the Disclosure Scotland Code of Practice, for registered persons and other recipients of disclosure information, we will ensure the following practice.

Requesting Disclosures

Disclosures will only be requested when necessary and relevant to a particular staff/volunteer posts and the information provided on a disclosure will only be used for recruitment purposes.

Our organisation will ensure that an individual’s consent is given before seeking a disclosure.  Before using disclosure information for any other purpose, we will seek their consent and will take advice from VSDS to ensure it is appropriate to use the disclosure for a purpose other than recruitment.  Furthermore, we will ensure that all sensitive personal information that is collated for the purposes of obtaining a disclosure will be always managed confidentially by those involved in the disclosure process.

We will not request disclosure information for other organisations without first discussing the appropriate process and receiving approval for this from VSDS.

Sharing Information

We will only share disclosure information with those authorised to see it in the course of their duties.

Storage

Disclosure information will be stored in secure conditions as follows:-

Online Results

A note will be taken of any vetting information which needs to be reviewed.  Access to disclosure information will be restricted to those that are entitled to see it in the course of their duties. When receiving an online result, it is essential that we record the information required for our Disclosure Tracking Record.

No photocopy or other image of the disclosure information will be retained.

Paper Disclosures

Paper documents will be kept in lockable and non-portable storage units. Access to disclosure information will be restricted to those that are entitled to see it in the course of their duties.

No photocopy or other image of the disclosure information will be retained.

Telephone Results

When receiving disclosure information by telephone, VSDS staff will only convey information detailed in disclosures accessed by our organisation to our enrolled signatories once they have correctly answered the relevant security questions.

Failing to provide the correct answers to the required security questions will result in VSDS withholding the required information and may lead to an investigation being carried out to establish why our enrolled signatory was unable to provide the required security information.  Once the disclosure information has been shared with us, VSDS will shred the disclosure.

VSDS does not keep a record of any information contained on the disclosure.  When receiving a telephone result, it is essential that we record the information required for our Disclosure Tracking Record.

Record Keeping

It is our organisations responsibility to keep accurate information about disclosures we have accessed. The following information will be recorded on our Disclosure Tracking Record:

Name of Applicant

Date of Birth

Level of Disclosure

Position applied for

Signatory

Date Posted/requested online

Date Processed (application requests only)

T Reference Number

Date disclosure issued

Certificate/Disclosure Number

PVG Membership Number

Date Destroyed/Deleted

Recruitment Decision and date

We will not record whether there was any vetting information as the Code of Practice prohibits this.

Retention

We will not retain disclosures for longer than is necessary for the purpose for which the disclosure record was obtained. PVG disclosures will be destroyed securely on receipt of an updated PVG disclosure, and they will not be retained beyond the last day that a scheme member is carrying out regulated work for Strathaven Community Trust.

Destruction/Deletion

We will take reasonable steps to ensure that disclosure information is destroyed by suitable and secure means, for example, shredding, pulping or burning.

We will ensure that all staff with access to disclosure information are aware of this policy and have received training and support to help them to comply with both this policy and the code of practice.  A copy of this policy will be made available to any applicant, member of staff or volunteer who requests it.

Lost Disclosures

If we lose a physical disclosure or any other record of disclosure information, we will notify the scheme member(s) affected, VSDS and the Information Commissioners Office.

Code of Practice

Further instructions and guidance on secure handling of disclosure information can be found in sections 3 and 12 of the Code of Practice.

Version Control