Chapter 1—Safeguarding values, policy and roles within
the Church
We have put in place the following recommended structures, roles and responsibilities to ensure the Church
can deliver on its responsibilities and duties in relation to Safeguarding.
Safeguarding values and policy
Values are the things that we hold dear or believe to be right and which govern our actions.
In addition to embracing the shared values listed above, the Safeguarding Service will also work to embed
our practice to reflect that:
The love of Christ compels us to care and protect those who are vulnerable in the Church and society.
Our priority is Safeguarding children and adults at risk of harm known to the Church and those who have
experienced historic or non-recent abuse.
Acting in the best interest of the person affected by harm or abuse is paramount.
There is zero tolerance for any type or level of harm to people known to the Church or using Church
services.
We have a duty to protect people as well as a duty of care.
Immediate reporting is essential if you suspect or witness harm or it is reported to you. This should be
reported to your Safeguarding Coordinator and/or your line manager.
Safeguarding is a multi-agency activity. The Church of Scotland will ensure that the social work
department, police, health and third sector organisations are involved, as appropriate, when harm is
witnessed, suspected or reported.

Communication and information sharing are essential within the Church of Scotland and with other
agencies to promote joint decision making.
The duty to protect takes precedence over individual confidentiality if they or others are at risk of harm or
have been harmed. Information sharing will be proportionate and shared only with those that need to
know. The person will be advised before information is shared unless to do so will place others at risk of
harm.
For adults at risk of harm – balancing risks and rights. We recognise the balance between the duty to
protect and the right of the adult who has capacity to make decisions to choose to live in a situation that
puts them at risk of harm. We will work with them to ensure that such risks are understood and minimised.
Risk taking, with appropriate support, can be positive and life-enhancing.
Any Safeguarding intervention must be the minimum necessary and proportionate to the risk of abuse or
harm.
The Church of Scotland Safeguarding Policy Statement
Ensuring a safe Church for all
The Church of Scotland has a deep concern for the wholeness and wellbeing of each
individual.
Through its Congregations, working together with the Safeguarding Service and statutory
agencies, the Church seeks to safeguarding the welfare of all people who come into
contact with the Church and its services.
The Gospel proclaims that it’s the responsibility of everyone within the fellowship of the
Church to prevent harm, be it physical, sexual or emotional, and we will always seek to
reduce risk.
The Church’s commitment to safeguarding reminds us that God cares passionately about
the welfare and wellbeing of all people.
The Church of Scotland policy statement must be displayed in the church.
A printable PDF version is available for download.
Preventing harm and abuse
The Safeguarding Service aims to prevent harm or abuse by ensuring that there is good recognition and
reporting.
The Safeguarding Service provides the following:
Safeguarding enquiries and advice: Support and guidance with everyday safeguarding matters where there
is not an incident of suspected or reported harm or abuse.

Advice and support for the safe recruitment and selection of all paid staff and volunteers: The process of
checking a person’s suitability to work with children or protected adults via membership of the Protection of
Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act, 2007 – known as the PVG Scheme – or the Disclosure and Barring Service
(DBS) in England.
Safe recruitment is about ensuring that only people suitable to work with children and adults at risk become
part of the workforce.
A Recruitment Sub-Committee (RSC): The remit of the RSC is to risk assess potential volunteers and paid
staff who have convictions on their PVG Scheme Record. This process demonstrates safe recruitment
practice and it ensures that those with criminal offences that do not affect their suitability for the particular
post can be safely employed.
Safeguarding training programmes: the training programmes meet the particular learning needs of
different groups of people in the Church e.g., volunteers, paid workers, Trustees, Safeguarding Coordinators,
Ministries Council staff and CrossReach employees.
Responding to disclosures of harm or abuse, or risk of abuse
The Safeguarding Service responds to disclosures in the following ways:
Managing safeguarding referrals
The service provides verbal and written guidance in situations where harm or abuse is witnessed, suspected
or reported to members of the Church and CrossReach Social Care Council services.
The Safeguarding Service also provide this expertise and guidance to the United Reformed Church in
Scotland as well as the Boys’ Brigade and Girls’ Brigade in Scotland.
Establishing Covenants of Responsibilities
The service advises and works alongside Safeguarding Panels working with those who pose a risk to ensure
their safe inclusion in worship.
The Church has a rigorous system of support and monitoring in place based on the use of Covenants of
Responsibilities, which are written and regularly reviewed agreements between those who pose a risk and
the congregation.
Often, this involves joint working with Criminal Justice Social Work services and/or the police.
For details of how to contact the Safeguarding Service, please see the Contacting the Safeguarding Service
section of the handbook introduction.
The role and responsibility of all workers
Section 16 of the Church of Scotland Safeguarding Act 2018 (As amended) is specific about the
responsibilities of all workers when Safeguarding concerns arise i.e.:
16. (1) Every Charge must have a Safeguarding Panel.
(2) If any Safeguarding Concerns arise regarding Workers, such Safeguarding Concerns shall be reported
without delay by the Safeguarding Coordinator to the Safeguarding Panel and to the Safeguarding Service.
The Safeguarding Service shall, where appropriate, report the matter to Disclosure Scotland.

(3) All Fora, Councils, Committees, Presbyteries and Safeguarding Coordinators have a general responsibility
promptly to report any Safeguarding Concerns to the Safeguarding Service.
(4) Advice given by the Safeguarding Service, when framed as an instruction, must be followed by all
Employing Agencies and by all [PERSON], Kirk Sessions, Safeguarding Coordinators, office-holders, staff
and volunteers involved in work with Vulnerable Groups.
(5) Fora, Councils, Committees, Presbyteries and Safeguarding Coordinators must report promptly to the
Safeguarding Service on action taken after advice from the Service has been given in relation to reports of
Safeguarding Concerns.
Advice given as an Instruction Section 16 (4)
After the General Assembly 2022 the Safeguarding Act was amended to include Section 16 (4). This was
done in light of the recommendations of the Investigation Report on Safeguarding in the Church of England
and the Church in Wales, published by the Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Abuse in October 2020.
This followed on from an Investigation Report into Case Studies published in May 2019.
Both Reports concluded that the Church of England had not resolved the need for safeguarding to function
at a diocesan level with the requirement for sufficient accountability to and oversight from the national
safeguarding team to ensure consistency of decision-making; and that it was essential that operational
decisions about safeguarding were made by safeguarding professionals, who were best placed to decide
what action should be taken to keep children safe.
Noting that clergy had an important role to play in ensuring that safeguarding was a priority which was
intrinsic to the beliefs of the Church, it was nevertheless recommended that they should not hold
operational responsibility for safeguarding, and that professional safeguarding staff should have the
authority to make decisions in respect of key safeguarding tasks, including risk assessments and associated
plans.
It was explicitly recommended that “it should be enshrined in policy that those who are volunteers and who
do not follow the directions of diocesan Safeguarding officers should be removed from responsibility of
working with children”.
The report’s recommendations were welcomed and have been implemented by the Church of England, with
policy documents being amended to make compliance with guidance on safeguarding matters compulsory,
rather than voluntary.
In light of these authoritative developments in best practice, the Safeguarding Act now provides that, where
advice given by the Safeguarding Service in relation to safeguarding concerns is framed as an instruction,
this must be followed.
In practice, congregations and CrossReach Services will receive written Confirmation of Safeguarding Advice
which will reflect the amendment to the Act.
The role and responsibilities of the Presbytery
The Presbytery is responsible for ensuring that Kirk Sessions adhere to the Safeguarding Act 2018 and
implement the Church’s Safeguarding Policy.

The Presbytery is also responsible for ensuring [PERSON] adhere to good safeguarding practice through
the submission of the SG11 Safeguarding Audit Checklist and SG07 Safeguarding Congregational Register via
the Annual Attestation of Records.
The Presbytery also has a responsibility to ensure effective communications about Safeguarding matters.
Safeguarding should appear as a standing item on one of the Presbytery Committees.
Additionally, [PERSON] are responsible for appointing Safeguarding Trainers and a Safeguarding
Presbytery Contact to coordinate safeguarding training. Details of these responsibilities can be found in
Chapter 4 of this handbook.
The role and responsibilities of the Trustees of the Kirk Session
Kirk Sessions are responsible for implementing the instructions of the Church’s General Assembly and
ensuring that their congregations adhere to them. The detail of these duties and General Assembly
Deliverances can be found in the Safeguarding Act 2018, which was accepted by the General Assembly in
May 2018.
The Safeguarding Act clarifies what is required of Congregations, Councils and others to ensure that
Safeguarding standards are achieved, monitored and reviewed.
The Safeguarding Service also has written guidance to sit alongside the Act.
In the terms of secular law, the Elders comprising the Kirk Session are Trustees, with all the duties and
responsibilities of that role. In other words, they are responsible, amongst other things, for appointing,
managing, resourcing, and supporting sufficient numbers of suitable personnel to run the services they wish
to provide.
The Kirk Session is, therefore, responsible for any decisions made on its behalf. For example, decisions of the
Safeguarding Panel or Safeguarding Coordinator. It is therefore important that the session is aware of their
responsibilities in relation to safeguarding and appoint these important roles with care and diligence.
The role and responsibilities of the Safeguarding Coordinator
All Kirk Sessions must appoint a Safeguarding Coordinator and this must always be formally minuted by the
Kirk Session.
[PERSON] may wish to recruit and appoint more than one Safeguarding Coordinator. This allows the
workload to be shared and also helps to maintain continuity if one of them retires or leaves.
The Safeguarding Coordinator is formally recruited and appointed to act on behalf of (not instead of) their
Kirk Session, to help ensure that the Safeguarding Act (that is, the instructions, recommendations and
legislation relating to safeguarding practice in the Church) is implemented. See Chapter 3 of this handbook
for guidance on the recruitment process.
[PERSON] should ensure that the congregation knows who their Safeguarding Coordinator is and what
their role is.
The Safeguarding Coordinator should report regularly to the Kirk Session.
Safeguarding should be a standing item on the Kirk Session’s agenda.
You will find the full job description for the Safeguarding Coordinator in Appendix 3 of this handbook.

The role and responsibilities of the Safeguarding Panel
A Safeguarding Panel is a group of at least three people appointed by the Kirk Session to manage
Safeguarding matters on its behalf.
The appointment of the Safeguarding Panel should also be minuted and every congregation must have one.
The suggested membership of a Panel is:
• The Safeguarding Coordinator
• The minister
• One or two other church members with relevant experience
There should be at least three Safeguarding Panel members but there can be more to include key relevant
people.
Occasionally, the minister decides not to be involved in the Safeguarding Panel because it may compromise
their pastoral care role.
Many congregations include their Session Clerk as a member of the Safeguarding Panel too.
In practice, Safeguarding Panels meet as and when required. They must be able to meet at short notice
when there is a Safeguarding incident.
Safeguarding Panel members require to apply for a Basic Disclosure check and must attend Safeguarding
training to equip them with the knowledge and skills for their role. More information on appropriate training
can be found in Chapter 3.
The Safeguarding Panel will:
• Assist the Safeguarding Coordinator with managing a safeguarding situation in the congregation.
Often this will include taking forward actions recommended by the Safeguarding Service.
• Support the Safeguarding Coordinator with the safe recruitment of volunteers to work with children
or adults at risk in congregations
• Consider how to manage a situation where an applicant is not suitable to work with children or
protected adults
• Ensure that the congregation complies with Safeguarding policies and the implementation of the
Safeguarding Act 2018
• Consider how to promote good Safeguarding practice and awareness-raising training
• Ensure that procedures are followed and records maintained to the satisfaction of the Presbytery
• Ensure safe arrangements for managing those who pose a risk who wish to attend worship in the
congregation. It is recognised that not all individual members of a Safeguarding Panel may feel
comfortable with this particular task - it is up to the individual. For more details on the policy and
procedures for working with those that pose a risk see Chapter 6 of this handbook.
It is very important that Safeguarding Panels keep a written/electronic record of their decisions, the reasons
for those decisions, fact-finding reports and notes of actions taken. These records must be kept in
accordance with the Church of Scotland Data Retention Policy.

Records should always be stored in a secure and confidential place. If records are stored electronically then
care should be taken to ensure the network is secure and the records are password protected.
In the event of a disclosure or suspicion of abuse, the Safeguarding Panel members must keep the
information confidential. This also means that confidential details about concerns of abuse/harm will not be
discussed at Kirk Session meetings.
The Safeguarding Service will advise the Safeguarding Coordinator and Safeguarding Panel in relation to
information which can/should be shared.
The role and responsibilities of the minister
The Church requires that ministers must:
• Be aware of the Church’s Safeguarding policy and procedure and encourage the implementation of
it
Attend an in-service Safeguarding Training Day as a candidate
•
• Become a member of the PVG Scheme
The minister’s role is to help the Kirk Session and Safeguarding Coordinator fulfil their Safeguarding remit
and to establish good pastoral practice for the care and support of Church members whose lives are (or
have been) affected by harm and/or abuse.
Ministers may also be members of Safeguarding Panels. The decision as to whether an individual minister
wants to be a member of a Safeguarding Panel is entirely at their own discretion. However, please consider
whether this may present a conflict of interest if the minister is also identified to provide pastoral support to
a victim or perpetrator of abuse.
Ministers who have to manage disclosures of abuse (both current and historical) should initially discuss
them with their Safeguarding Coordinator and Safeguarding Panel for support and advice.
Similarly, the Safeguarding Service must be contacted.
Safeguarding when congregations enter into a union
Background
Presbytery reform has brought challenges across many areas of responsibility within congregations, and we
understand these experiences may be difficult for you. Like other aspects of congregation life and work,
Safeguarding has been impacted by these reforms and we have recognised the need for some guidance to
support our Safeguarding Coordinators and Panels as well as [PERSON].
Structure of Safeguarding in Unions
Different Presbyteries have approach union in different ways. There is no right or wrong way other than what
is right for each individual Union.

From discussion and information, you have provided during contact with the safeguarding team, we can
identify two main approaches:
1. Full Union Safeguarding Management:
The Safeguarding oversight responsibilities are transferred from individual congregations to Safeguarding
Coordinator(s) and Panel who manage all safeguarding on behalf of the Union. There may be more than one
coordinator to manage the workload; however, the coordinators are responsible for the united
congregation.
2. Maintaining pre-union structures:
a. Individual pre-union congregations maintain a Safeguarding Coordinator and Panel. In this structure, there
will be multiple Safeguarding Coordinators and Panels. The coordinator and panel will have responsibility for
their original section of the congregation.
b. Individual pre-union congregations maintain a Safeguarding Coordinator but have one Safeguarding Panel.
In this structure, there will be multiple Safeguarding Coordinators but only one Safeguarding Panel. The
coordinator will have responsibility for their original section of the congregation, but the panel will have
responsibility for the united congregation.
Regardless of which approach taken, the decision must be approved by the Kirk Session.
While all these approaches are acceptable, to maintain a good standard of Safeguarding oversight, we need
to have some common approved approaches to ensure safeguarding management is consistent and
effective.
The Safeguarding Service will only accept one congregational register for each Union. Should you request a
copy of your register from the service, only one whole Union congregation register will be provided.

Recording and Reporting Requirements
Model 1: Full Union Safeguarding Management
The Safeguarding Coordinator and Panel responsibilities mirror what was in place in the pre-union
congregations.
Role of Safeguarding Coordinator(s):
If there will be more than one coordinator, you must consider how you will align the responsibilities within the
job description including but not limited to:
Maintaining the Congregational Register of regulated workers and those subject to Basic Disclosure
Recruitment
Maintaining accurate job descriptions
Conducting interviews
Requesting references
Processing applications for criminal records checks (PVG Scheme/ Basic Disclosure)
Notification of leavers
Manage reports of concern
Recording information
Reporting concerns to the Safeguarding Service
Following advice provided by the Safeguarding Service
Safeguarding Panels:
In this model, the Kirk Session must appoint panel members. Care should be taken in considering the
membership of the panel. A Safeguarding Panel should have approximately five members. It is not appropriate
to create one large Safeguarding Panel from all pre-union panel members. There are specific reasons for this
which include legislation and regulatory guidance.
When managing sensitive and personal information, such information should only be shared with the least
number of people to enable effective safe management of safeguarding concerns. Whilst it is acceptable to
share such information for safeguarding purposes, a person’s right to privacy must be upheld and protected by
those responsible for the management of the information.
Safeguarding Panel ‘Pool’ Members:
Should you to retain some additional panel members to support when others are unavailable or to step in
should another member have to step aside due to a conflict of interest, this is acceptable. However, all
additional or ‘panel pool’ members must be fully trained and must refresh their training as prescribed by the
Safeguarding Training Pathway.
One Congregational Register should be maintained which includes details of the whole Union congregation.
A regular safeguarding report should be provided to the Kirk Session which reflects the whole Union
congregation.

Model 2(a): Maintaining Pre-union Safeguarding Management Structure
Role of Safeguarding Coordinator(s): Is as stated within Model 1; however, they will only have responsibility
for safeguarding within their pre-union section of the Union
Safeguarding Panels: Is as stated within Model 1; however, they will only have responsibility for safeguarding
within their pre-union section of the Union.
Model 2(a): Maintaining Pre-union Safeguarding Management Structure
Role of Safeguarding Coordinator(s): Is as stated within Model 1; however, they will only have responsibility
for safeguarding within their pre-union section of the Union
Safeguarding Panels: Is as stated within Model 1; however, they will have responsibility for safeguarding
management for the whole Union congregation.
Model 2 (a) & (b)
One Congregational Register should be maintained which includes details of the whole Union congregation.
How this is managed on a local basis is for the Kirk Session and Safeguarding Coordinators to decide. If each
pre-union section wishes to maintain separate individual registers, they can do so. However, it is imperative
that one collated register is maintained and is available for annual attestation, and for the Safeguarding
Service on request.
A regular safeguarding report should be provided to the Kirk Session which reflects the whole Union
congregation.
How this is managed on a local basis is for the Kirk Session and Safeguarding Coordinators to decide. It is
acceptable to have reports from each pre-union section of congregation or for information to be collated into
one report